# Identifying-Relevant-Features-for-Attacks-in-KDD-99-dataset

# Introduction

Detection of actions that compromise the access to a resource plays an important role as the usage of internet has grown tremendously. Denial of Service (DoS) and Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks are the most common types of such attacks. This calls for the need of a software application which is known as a Intrusion Detection System (IDS) [1] that could monitor the system and network activities to identify if there happens to be any malicious operations. As some of the sectors such as business,security, financial, healthcare moved towards LAN and WAN applications, these applications made the network an attractive target for the intruder to bring a big vulnerability for the community. With the growth of internet, intruders have adopted different techniques to crack password, detect unencrypted text to cause vulnerabilities to the system. Thus, security is needed for the user to protect their system form the attackers. One of the popular prevention technique is Firewall system that is used to protect the private network from public network. 

IDS has been used in many different fields that includes network related activities, medical applications, credit card frauds. Three types of Intrusion Detection Systems based on analyzed activity are Network based, Host based and Physical IDS. Network based IDS (NIDS) attempts to identify anomalous behavior on the network traffic. Being a detection system it does not block the network traffic but gathers information regarding the packets and also the logging information so as to identify any suspicious behavior in the network. Snort is an example of NIDS. Host based IDS (HIDS) attempts to identify unauthorized, anomalous behavior on a specific device. This involves an agent installed on each system that monitors local OS and application activity. In order to identify unauthorized activity it uses a combination of signatures and rules. Tripware and AIDE are examples of HIDS. Physical IDS identifies threats to physical systems.

Firewalls are examples of Physical IDS. There are two approaches to detect intrusion: Anomaly based intrusion detection and Signature based intrusion detection. Anomaly detection [9] observes normal behavior and any event that does not follow the normal behavior is considered to be suspicious. Activities far from normal are flagged as an intrusion. Signature based detection [8] (a.k.a. misuse detection) makes use of a dataset that has instances each of which is labeled as normal or intrusive. Machine learning approaches are used to train the data. The signature is retained in this technique that helps to detect the intrusion. The advantage of signature based IDS is that it is easy to implement, lightweight but it is impossible to detect new attacks when we do not have a signature for the new attack. 

Weakness of signature-based IDSs in detecting novel attacks has attracted the attention of many researchers. KDD 99 intrusion detection dataset, based on DARPA 98 dataset, consists of TCP dump data from Lincoln Labs consisting of network activity grouped into five categories: normal activity and attacks such as DoS, U2R, R2L and Probe. It consists of 24 attack types in the training dataset and additional 14 attack types in test data which makes it interesting for evaluating a signature based IDS. [5] [7] A denial-of-service attack (DoS attack) is a type of cyber attack where the authorized, intended users are denied to use the network resources, this is achieved by flooding the targeted machine or resources with too many requests to overload the system. In user-to-root attack (U2R), the attacker tries to gain the root access which leads to several vulnerability such as sniffing password, a dictionary and social engineering attacks e.g. perl, xterm. In order to expose the machine vulnerabilities and exploit privileges, an attacker sends packets over the internet to a machine he/she does not have access to. This is a remote to user attack (R2L). In order to determine weakness or vulnerabilities that may later be exploited to compromise the system the scanner scans a machine or a networking device. This is known as Probing.
